Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in today's talk
we're going to be looking at basic measurements
in space with a view to eventually going
on to higher dimensions so going beyond
the familiar one-dimensional two-dimensional and
three-dimensional situations to higher dimensions
we'd like to know what are the right ways of
thinking about measuring in higher dimensional
spaces okay so there's a very common assumption
that's almost universal these days when we think
about Euclidean three-dimensional space and that
is that the basic measurements in our mathematical
three-dimensional space are length area and volume
so for example here's our three-dimensional space
if we have a pair of points forming a segment
the national question is usually well what is
the length of that segment if we have a
little triangle CDE the natural question
is what is the area of that triangle and if
we have a tetrahedron we generally ask what
is the volume of that tetrahedron so these are
mathematical analogues of physical measurements
that we make in our physical space which are an
everyday practice very useful so there's this
automatic assumption well that what works in the
physical space is naturally going to be working
best in the mathematical space as well that's a
big assumption actually which turns out to not be
correct okay so a very fundamental reorientation
is required here as to what exactly the roles of
these three things are and what are the right
ways of thinking about measurements so it turns
out that side lengths areas and volumes do play a
role okay but it is much more limited than what is
usually imagined instead the quadratic notions of
quadrants quad RIA and room a new term which will
introduce they are more fundamental and general
so up to a constant quadrants is just the square
of the usual length quadri is just the square of
the usual area and quad room is just the square
of the usual volume and there are some constants
there that are chosen to make things a little bit
peasant mathematically but essentially these
quadratic quantities have a big advantage to
the more familiar ones namely that they work
algebraically much better and that they don't
rely on infinite processes to actually evaluate
mathematically so I've been arguing very strongly
in the last few dozen videos that our current
theory of real numbers doesn't work really as
well as people imagine that it does but today I
want to look at things from a slightly different
point of view so although that's certainly my
orientation it's not necessary to agree with
me to understand what I'm gonna be doing here
so let's have a slightly different orientation
today and ask the following question how far
can we go if we restrict to rational numbers
in geometry the reason we might want to do this
is because if we make things work for rational
numbers then we can extend our understanding more
easily to other fields in particular to finite
fields all right so this is the orientation we're
gonna have a way to just work over the rational
numbers and sort of ask well how far can we go
what can we do in the way of measuring in three
dimensional rational space and the context that
we're going to be working with are these affine
spaces which are very simply described so our one
dimensional affine space consisted of I find 1
points which were just numbers rational numbers
enclosed in square brackets and visualized as
usual as a point on the on the line so there's
the point 3/4 so I find one point and then our
two-dimensional affine space consisted of I find
two points which were pairs of rational numbers
enclosed in square brackets visualized as usual
as a point in the usual XY plane and then we
can go to three-dimensional affine space which
consists of triples ABC of numbers and closed
in square brackets and we can visualize that and
also a familiar way in terms of axes x y&z say
and there would be the point I equals 1 2 3 1
this way to this way and 3 that way so once we
adopt this point of view that points are just
strings of natural numbers separated by commas
and enclosed in square brackets then it's not hard
for us to see how to go to higher dimensions so we
can introduce higher dimensional or n dimensional
space just by considering an Athlon endpoint to
be a list of n numbers enclosed in square brackets
all right so it's an attractive kind of framework
that allows us to think of space as not just
being in one dimension but there's actually
this hierarchy of bigger and bigger spaces and
there's a natural relation between the spaces
in the sense that we could identify the one
dimensional space is sitting inside the two
dimensional space and we could identify the two
dimensional space as sitting inside the three
dimensional space if we wanted to and and then
so on but there's actually quite a lot of ways
of doing that for example the one dimensional
space could be thought of as being this line in
two dimensional space or may be this line or in
fact maybe some other line as well that's gonna
be an interesting issue that raises up later
in this lecture all right so that's our basic
orientation to what actually the spaces are that
we're considering all right so now when it comes
to actually measuring in our various spaces
there were different options that we looked at
when we first started talking about so in the
one-dimensional situation we talked about the
options of considering lengths or displacements
or quadrants --is let's have a look at what we
call displacement which we might also call signed
length so if we have a directed segment so a line
segment oay but with a direction so there's a
first one and there's a second one and let's
say the for simplicity that the first point is the
origin o and that the second point is the point a
with a coordinate X then we can define the signed
length of this oriented segment to be the length
of O a which is just X more generally it would
be the difference between the x coordinate here
and the x coordinate here so this notion is purely
algebraic it could be positive or negative or zero
depending on the position of a with respect to
all and it is quite a legitimate use of the term
length in geometry so certainly not my position
that length has no role in the one dimensional
situation this notion of side length is both
natural and very reasonable and important so
now let's look at the two dimensional situation
so we'll consider the analog of a segment which
is a triangle and for convenience we'll translate
the triangle so that one of its vertices is at the
origin all so here is the triangle Oh a 1 a 2 well
suppose that a 1 is the point x1y1 at a 2 is the
point x2y2 and we'll think about this triangle
as being an oriented triangle it's represented
by this little arrow above it so means we're
thinking about the three vertices is having an
orientation that we'd all from this one to this
one to this one and if necessary a background
that oriented triangle has assigned area
we can associate to it a number which is
the number X 1 Y 2 minus X 2 y 1 over
2 that is basically our definition of
area in the plane but it is without an
absolute value so it can be positive
and can be negative depending on their
relative positions of these three points
now this quantity here that's occurring in
the numerator is a very important kind of
algebraic construction in mathematics and it's
closely connected with this two-by-two array
or matrix that's very important in linear algebra
so the matrix x1 y1 x2 y2 whose rows are just the
coordinates of our two vectors that has what's
called a determinant the determinant is denoted
by these square brackets and the value of that
determinant is by definition exactly this quantity
so x1 times y2 minus x2 times y1 the product of
those two minus the product of those two so that
determinant is appearing right here as the signed
area of this oriented triangle so yes in our two
dimensional space the notion of side area is both
natural and important excellent so now let's go
up one dimension to our three dimensional affine
space and we'll consider the analog of a segment
or triangle in this three dimensional space which
is a tetrahedron formed by four points I will put
one of those points at the origin and the other
ones will be a 1 the coordinates x1 y1 z1 a 2
and also a 3 corresponding coordinates this is a
general tetrahedron whose 1 vertex is at the point
all alright and we're also going to take these
four points in the specified order so all a 1 a
2 a 3 that order will be represented by this arrow
above it meaning we're talking about the oriented
tetrahedron and corresponding to our notion of
signed length of a segment and signed area of
a triangle there's a notion of a signed volume of
this tetrahedron what is that well it's a little
bit more complicated okay it involves all these
nine numbers as it really must and it is X 1 Y 2
Z 3 minus X 1 Y 3 Zed 2 plus X 2 y 3 Zed 1 minus
X 3 y 2 Z 1 plus X 3 y 1 Z 2 minus X 2 y 1 z 3 all
over 6 and in linear algebra this numerator here
is also a determinant it's the determinant of this
3x3 matrix that we form by taking the rows of the
three points and creating an array or matrix from
them and again the square bars denote this notion
of determinant which we have not yet defined but
which ends up playing a very important role
in mathematics and we will have to talk about
determinants a little while later all right so
this is the usual notion or definition of what
a signed volume is of an oriented tetrahedron
and it really does depend on the orientation
if we interchange two of the points then you can
check that the signed value changes sign so you
could say well we could take the absolute value
of this and then you would get what we usually
call the volume yes you could do that but that
would sort of diminish the algebraic naturalness
of this definition okay so this is a very this is
a fundamental definition of a signed volume of an
oriented tetrahedron now you may well ask why
that factor of 1/6 multiplying the determinant
that's an analogue to the factor of 1/2 that sat
in front of the determinant in the triangular case
in the triangular case we can explain that 1/2
because the determinant by itself is the area of
the parallelogram formed by the two sides and the
triangle law we're considering is just 1/2 of that
parallelogram and so it's reasonable that there'd
be a 1/2 out there there's a similar kind of
explanation for the 1/6 in this three-dimensional
situation but it's a little bit more geometrically
involved and I'm gonna leave it to you as
an exercise to think about this particular
situation here so here's a cube say a unit cube
sides a one labeled like this and we're looking at
this vertex o here and thinking about these three
adjacent vertices in the cube in other words the
nearest neighbors to all on the cube they form an
equilateral triangle and if you imagine slicing
the cube with a plane through those three points
then you would separate off a tetrahedron and the
claim is that the volume of this tetrahedron
should be 1/6 the volume of the cube in other
words it should be 1/6 and you can verify that
for yourself by a little bit of further slicing
of the cube so see if you can figure out how
to slice the cube into 6 tetrahedral pieces
which all have the same volume once you do that
then you can sort of see well if they all have
the same volume then in the volume of any one
of them should be naturally 1/6 all right so
our conclusion so far is that side lengths areas
and volumes are well-defined in one dimensional
affine space two dimensional affine space and
three dimensional affine space respectively
but let's be careful what that precisely means
it means that the notion of sign lengths has
been defined in context of a1 the notion
of the signed area has been defined in the
context of a2 and the notion of signed valium
has been defined in the context of a3 but what
if we want to mix measurements for example
what about length say in a2 or a3 or area in
a3 just because we have defined the length or
rather the signed length of an interval on our
one dimensional affine plane does not mean that
we have yet defined the notion of length of an
oriented segment in our two dimensional affine
plane or in our three dimensional affine space
physically if we use our physical intuition we
don't see any distinction between the segment
there which is on this one-dimensional line or the
segment here which is in a different position or
three-dimensional space begins to us we can move
this line from here to here and clearly nothing
about the properties of this line seemed to change
physically we must be careful not to transfer that
assumption of physical movability of things to
our mathematical framework ok it's tempting and
maybe a very natural thing to want to do but
we must be careful to avoid introducing this
assumption that we can do that so for example
very familiar example going back essentially
to the pythagoreans 600 years before Christ
in fact concurrent with the start of serious
mathematics in our world so this basic example
have an ordinary plane they have our origin all
there we have this point a which is one over
in this direction of 1 over in this direction
now we know that the quadrants between o and
a is well-defined it's this squared plus this
squared one squared plus one squared which is 2
but this number 2 cannot be written as squared
for any rational number D in the one-dimensional
case quadrants is always the square of a signed
length but here this quadrants between these
two points is not a square so it means that
although the quadrants exists the notion of
length does not so we're working here in the
rational framework what we would agree that we're
going to think about what we can do just with the
rational orientation you can all agree whether
you believe in real numbers or not that in the
rational framework the quadrants exists while
the length does not so here is a similar kind
of example but going up in one dimension so here's
our X Y z axes in our three-dimensional space and
here's a point a one just one along the x axis
a two which is one along the y axis and again
if we look at these two points here the quadrants
between them is two which is not a square so again
also in three dimensions we found a situation
where the quadrants exist but the length does
not but we can go a little bit further by looking
at these three symmetrical points a 1 a 2 and a 3
forming this little equilateral triangle each
side having quadrants two and now if we ask
what is the quadri of this triangle Quadra
so our formula for quadrille was involving
that Archimedes function triple quad function
so well the three quadrants is are 2 2 and 2
so we take 2 plus 2 plus 2 all squared minus 2
times 2 squared plus 2 squared plus 2 squared
well this is 6 squared which is 36 now we're
subtracting 2 times 12 or 24 for a total of 12
now in the plane this quad RIA when we defined it
turned out to be 16 times the square of the area
but here in this three-dimensional situation we
see that we're not going to be able to write 12 as
16 times the square of the area and why not well
it's basically because the number 3 which is a
factor here it's a factor 4 times 3 4 is a square
16 is a square but 3 is not a square and because
of that we cannot define a rational area of this
triangle in this three-dimensional situation so
again this is analogous to what happens when
we go from one dimensions to two dimensions
with length in one dimension side length works
but in two dimensions side length does no longer
work similarly in two dimensions signed area of a
triangle works but when we go to three dimensions
that notion breaks down in general so while the
quad realist rying GLE exists the area does not
so this phenomena is closely related to what I
called in an earlier video the price we pay for
coordinates this idea of Cartesian coordinate
system to define our mathematical space which
is a very powerful and absolutely crucial
development in modern mathematics going back
to Descartes and firma we also have to pay a price
for this it's not entirely free so in our physical
space length and area seem elementary notions that
are independent of orientation we can move lines
around and we can move triangles around in our
physical space and none of their property seems
to be affected in particular we can measure areas
and the areas don't change when we move them what
we're seeing is that in our Cartesian view of
geometrical space that what's the mathematical
view this is no longer the case so it turns out
that this is true of volume as well volume is
unambiguous and defined in three-dimensional space
but when we extend it to higher dimensional spaces
it again is generally not defined now note that
this insight is largely hidden if you believe in
the fairy tale world of real numbers okay this
is one of the disadvantages that the dream world
of real numbers has that when you adopt it you
no longer see this very important distinction
because things are lost if one is sort of willing
to believe that there are square roots around that
you can just sort of snap your fingers and they
are conjured into existence all right but with
this rational framework we see that in fact it's
a number theoretical issue number theory raises
its head here the issue of whether a given
quantity is a square or not is exactly the
pure mathematical notion that determines
whether some length or area exists or not
so we gain something there so added complexity
in our world but it's also a richer world that
we get by having this rational point of view
and when we move to more general fields like
finite fields and other fields it's exactly this
orientation that we need to structure ourselves
correctly so this introduces what we might call
the isotropy conundrum okay which is that all
lines in a higher dimensional Cartesian space are
not geometrically isomorphic if we're working in
three-dimensional space mathematically then
this line and this line are not necessarily
the same isomorphic means the same or equivalent
they are not necessarily the same geometrically
when we make measurements in this line or in
this line we can expect to get different kinds
of numbers similarly all planes in the higher
dimensional Cartesian space ie dimensions three
or higher are not geometrically isomorphic it's
not automatically true that this plane and this
plane have exactly the same geometrical
properties in three space I know there's
this kind of illegitimate given axiomatic idea
that almost all mathematicians in the beginning
of the 20th century think is self self-evident
but it is not only not self-evident it is also
not true it just represents a misunderstanding
of our geometrical world we cannot appeal to
the physical world and say oh it's true in the
physical world and therefore it's true in the
mathematical world that doesn't follow in fact we
actually don't know whether it's really true with
the physical world because we don't understand our
physical world as well as we do our mathematical
world and our mathematical world we understand
much better so let me illustrate that with an
interesting curiosity in our two dimensional
Cartesian plane in a two there are in fact
no equilateral triangles because if you had an
equilateral triangle like this with quadrants
Q Q and Q with these three vertices are all
rational points then if you compute the Quadra
of this triangle its sum of the three Q's all
squared minus 2 times Q squared plus Q squared
plus Q squared you get altogether 3 Q squared
here there is a 9 Q squared and here there's a
minus 6 Q squared for a total of 3 Q squared but
such an expression cannot be 16 times the area
squared because in that case and everything here
is a square except for 3 which would imply that
3 is a square so 3 is not a square in rational
numbers so some people who are sore beginners
to this subject get perplexed by this and say
well how can it be that there's no equilateral
triangles in the rational plane well that's just
the way it is that's the way mathematics is I'm
sorry but you know in the rational 2-dimensional
plane there are no equilateral triangles okay
of course there are approximate equilateral
triangles it's easy enough to get points which
are approximately having the same quadrants but
exactly no there isn't but in three-dimensional
space we have just seen that there are in fact
equilateral triangles in fact very simple elegant
ones for example the triangle ABC consisting
of these three points which are each at the
unit position on each of the three coordinate
vectors so this triangle definitely exists that
all the quadrants azar to and we've seen that
the Quadra is 12 so in this case what happens
is that they triangle exist the quadri exists but
the area does not the it's the area width of this
equilateral triangle which is not well-defined
concept this does not make any sense to say what
is the area of that equilateral triangle you can
ask what is the quad really collateral triangle
and the answer is 12 that's we can do over the
rational numbers in this geometry all right so
this is all very interesting and of course there
are higher dimensional analogues of this right we
can sort of see that we're moving up some ladder
one dimensions two dimensions three dimensions the
kinds of patterns that we're seeing here in these
low dimensions is at least likely to continue on
in some fashion if we're able to define things
in the right way if we see some way of extending
our definitions so next time we're going to have
another look at this situation and perhaps resolve
things to a certain extent or clarify that in
fact signed lengths areas and volumes do play
a role in these higher dimensions but it's not
an absolute role it's rather a relative role so
we're going to move to widening our understanding
of what measurement actually involves from this
sort of absolute kind of position which is very
popular these days to a more relative position
which is in fact more in the lines of what the
ancient Greeks thought it's very interesting
and a circle of ideas that are coming around here
and in many ways we start to see that the way the
ancient Greeks thought about things was actually a
more profound way than what we are doing currently
very interesting so I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening